Monte Carlo simulation from
the most common distributions
is straightforward in R.
As a refresher from the previous course,
let's start up R and
talk a little bit about how we'll
use it throughout the course.
When we start up R,
we first see the R console
which gives us some information about
the current R session that we are running.
We will always enter our code
into the R console to run it.
For example,
if we want to know the answer of 2 + 3,
we can enter it directly in the console
and press Return to get the answer.
It will be convenient for
us to save our code for later and
one way to do that is to use R scripts.
To open a new script,
go to File > New Document.
This opens a new script for
us where we can work over here,
create and edit and
save code that we can run in R console.
We also get a warning which
has to do with the particular
operating system of
the computer I'm using.
You may or
may not get this warning on your computer
but we're not going to worry about it.
It won't affect our session.
Let's begin our session by setting
the random number generator seed,
using the set.seed function in R.
The only argument we need to give
the set.seed function is some integer,
positive or negative.
This function initializes
the random number generator so
that we can replicate
any results that we get.
To get different random numbers,
simply change the value that
we enter into this function.
To run this code, we have several options.
One option is to select the line of code,
copy it, and
paste it directly into the console.
And press Return to run it.
Alternatively we can select the line
of code and go to Edit > Execute.
Which will also run the code.
You may have also noticed that
there is a keyboard shortcut.
Associated with execute.
It is to hold down the command key and
press Return.
So if we want to run this line of code,
we hold down the Cmd key and press Return.
Now that we've set the random seed for
our session,
let's start with an example
from the previous segment.
Where our random variable
theta follows a gamma
distribution with parameters a = 2 and
b = one-third.
This gamma distribution could represent
the posterior distribution of theta
if our data came from a Poisson
distribution with mean theta and
we had used a conjugate gamma prior.
Let's start with Monte Carlo
sample size 100.
We will save that as a variable, n = 100.
Let's also say the parameters for
the gamma distribution.
a, the shape parameter is 2.
And b the rate parameter is 1.0/ 3.0
These variables have been
entered into our script but
are not currently saved in the R session.
To run this code,
we need to execute each of these lines.
First, I'll enter n by
pressing command and Return.
Now, m is saved in a workspace.
We can also run multiple lines of code
by selecting multiple lines of code,
and then executing them together.
Now m, a, and b are all in our session.
We can verify their values.
To simulate, m independent samples
from this gamma distribution,
we're going to use the r gamma function.
We will save the simulated
values in the variable theta.
And we'll run rgamma,
which creates random generations
from the gamma distribution, and
we want to create m of those.
We also have to enter the parameters for
the gamma distribution.
shape = a and rate = b.
To run the simulation,
simply run this line of code.
All 100 draws from this gamma distribution
are now saved in the theta vector.
We can look at this by printing it,
where we see all 100 simulated values.
If we don't want to see all of them,
we can also use the head function.
Which shows us only the first six values.
If we want to see the end of the vector,
we can use the tail function.
Let's plot a histogram of
these generated values and
compare it to the true density
of a gamma distribution.
To plot the histogram,
let's use the hist function.
And give it our theta vector.
We're also going to use
the frequency = false option so
that it gives us a probability density.
Rather than counts.
If I run this line of code, we get
the histogram for the simulated values.
To compare this to the theoretical
probability density function for the gamma
distribution, let's use the curve
function, which draws a curve on our plot.
The curve we want to draw is the density
of the gamma distribution, or dgamma.
The first argument for
this function is x, which is generic, and
refers to the x-axis.
And then we need to give
it our parameters for
the gamma distribution, shape and rate.
To visually distinguish this from
our histogram, let's add some color.
We'll make it blue because
it's the true value.
And we'll say add equals true, so
that it creates a plot on
top of the existing plot.
So, if we run this curve, we get the true
probability density function for
a gamma distribution with shape to,
and rate 1/3.
We can see that the data are pretty
good at approximating this distribution.
We can now use our simulated vales
to find a Monte Carlo approximation
to the expected value of theta.
To do this, let's take an average
of our simulated values.
One way to do this is to sum
all of the theta variables and
divide by the total
number that we simulated.
If we run this line, we get our Monte
Carlo approximation to the mean, 5.5.
A faster way to calculate this would
be to use the mean function directly.
We say we want the mean
of the theta vector.
We get the same answer.
How does this compare with the true
value of the expected value of theta?
If theta follows this gamma
distribution with shape a and
rate b,
the expected value will be a divided by b.
For this gamma distribution,
the expected value or the mean is 6.
Our Monte Carlo approximation was okay,
but not great.
We can improve this
Monte Carlo approximation
if we simulate more values, let's do that.
We'll increase our m, the Monte Carlo
sample size, up to let's say 10,000.
We have to rerun this line of code, so
that M is saved as 10,000.
We're not changing the parameters A and
B, so we'll leave those as they are.
But we do need to re-simulate
our theta vector.
We now have 10,000 samples
from this gamma distribution.
Let's look at the Monte Carlo
approximation of the mean.
6.02, much closer to the true
theoretical value of 6.
What about the variance of theta?
We can calculate our Monte Carlo
approximation to the variance using
the var function in R, where we calculate
the sample variance of theta, 18.04.
Can you guess what the theoretical
value for this variance would be?
For this gamma distribution
the variance is a divided by b squared,
the true value is 18.
So our Monte Carlo approximation
is actually quite close.
We can also use our Monte Carlo simulation
to approximate other characteristics
of this gamma distribution.
For example, if we want to approximate
the probability that theta is less than 5.
We can simply count how many of our
simulated thetas are less than 5.
Let's do this.
First we'll create an indicator variable
that indicates whether
theta is less than 5.
This line of code instructs
R to look at each individual
drawn in the theta vector and
compare it to the value 5.
Let's run it.
And now let's look at
the first few values.
So the first value of theta that
we simulated was not less than 5,
because we get a false value for
our indicator.
The same is true for the second value
of theta, it was not less than 5.
But the third value was less than 5.
Let's just confirm that this is true.
The first two values were not less than
5 but the third value is less than 5.
Conveniently, if we calculate
the mean of this indicator,
R will convert the true/false
values into 0's and
1's, add them up, and
take the mean for us.
This creates an approximation to
the probability that theta is less than 5.
In our case, our Monte Carlo approximation
to this probability is 0.497.
If we want to compare this
to the true probability,
we can use the pgamma function.
That is, pgamma, which evaluates
the cumulative distribution function,
the CDF for this gamma.
We want, We want
to know the probability of being less than
5 if the shape is a and the rate is b.
And we can see that our Monte Carlo
approximation is really quite close.
The true probability that this theta
random variable is less than 5 is 0.496.
What if we're interested
in the 0.9 quantile or
the 90th percentile of this distribution.
This gamma distribution for theta.
We can use the quantile function, In R,
where we give it the theta values and
we tell it what
probability we want or
which quantile we want.
In this case we want the 90th percentile
or the 0.9 quantile of theta.
Let's run this line.
We see that the 90th percentile
of a gamma to one-third Is 11.74.
That is our Monte Carlo
approximation to the quantile.
If we want to know
the actual true quantile,
we can use the qgamma function
where we want the probability
of being less than this value to be 0.9.
Again, we need to give
it the gamma parameters.
If we run this line,
we get the true theoretical value, 11.669.
Again, quite close to our
Monte Carlo approximation.
Of course, with the gamma distribution,
all of these theoretical values
are available as functions in R.
And so Monte Carlo simulation
is not as useful to us.
But later in the course, we will
not have functions like the dgamma,
or the pgamma, or
the qgamma available to us for
the distributions we'll be
using later in the course.
This is where Monte Carlo estimation
will be particularly useful to us.